---
slug: russia-crypto-blog
title: The Impact of Cryptocurrency on the Russia Ukraine War
authors: [oloveluck]
tags: [russia, ukraine, crypto, decentralization, bitcoin]
---

The Russian invasion of Ukraine has thrust the power of cryptocurrency into the spotlight, and we can finally see whether cryptocurrency can deliver on the promises that blockchain investors have been making since its inception. <!--truncate--> Tokens like Bitcoin are based on the idea of using mathematical consensus mechanisms instead of banks or governments to create currency and to verify the legitimacy of transactions. Despite the dramatic rise of Bitcoin’s value since its release in 2009, it is still far less useful than traditional money. Bitcoin is slower than the USD and can only handle a fraction of the daily transactions that occur in the United States economy, let alone the world. The tradeoff between utility and the requirement for trusting centralized entities is simply not worth it in the United States. We can reasonably trust banks to hold our money, companies like Visa to verify our transactions, and for the government to print new money. While this may be true in the United States, for Ukraine in the middle of an invasion, and for Russia facing sanctions from most of the world, this trust is breaking down. 

For organizations in Ukraine, cryptocurrency has become a successful means of accepting donations from around the world. The most prominent example has been a DAO established by the founder of a Ukrainian crypto company Everstake, Sergey Vasylchukd. This DAO has now been adopted by the Ministry of Digital Transformation of Ukraine and has received more than $60 million in donations. Since the beginning of the Russian invasion the Ukrainian hryvnia has become unstable along with the Ukrainian banking system. As a result, many vendors are holding and exchanging cryptocurrency directly for goods and services. While the current state of cryptocurrency may not be suitable to replace standard currency in a stable economy, it can be a useful substitute when there is a breakdown of trusted centralized structures during wartime and instability. 

On the other side, cryptocurrency is being seen as a potential workaround for the sanctions being placed on Russia in response to their invasion. Since cryptocurrencies are not directly regulated by governments and crypto wallets are not linked with a specific person or their nationality, it is impossible to apply sanctions or legislation to prohibit transactions. While some Russian people have been able to reduce the effect of sanctions on their own finances, cryptocurrency is not a way for the government to bypass sanctions as a whole. Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin do not have the bandwidth to handle the amount of transactions necessary to override the sanctions. Since every transaction is made public on the blockchain to the entire network, it is also possible to effectively analyze the blockchain to figure out why transactions are being made and who the transactions are between. Cryptocurrencies are not really meant to prevent anonymity for this reason. 

Cryptocurrency is not going to have a huge impact on the outcome of the Russia-Ukraine war, but it is one of the first instances of the technology being valuable for its utility not just its speculative potential value. Cryptocurrency may be a long way from being a day-to-day currency in a stable economy, but for nations at war, it can hold its value without reliance on banks or the government.
