---
slug: info-warfare
title: Russia's Information Warfare
authors: jehaneali
tags: [russia, information warfare, disinformation]
---

Information warfare is a phrase that’s being thrown around more and more frequently lately, especially as Russia continues to take action against Ukraine. But what exactly is information warfare? 
<!--truncate-->
According to an original Russian government document, it’s defined as “confronting a state in the information space by damaging information systems, processes, and resources.” Russia has a history of using information warfare -- the Soviet regime relied on information weapons, and first mentioned the term “active measures” in a 1919 Bolshevik document. 

Technology has helped the Russians to be much more successful in effectively spreading disinformation than the Soviets were. Russia considers “cyber” and “information warfare” to essentially refer to the same thing, and generally uses the term “information space” to include computer and human information processing. Russia’s modern-day propaganda campaign has four main pillars: “Unprecedented budgets for its propaganda efforts; modernized propaganda machinery employed by all modern media to support the Kremlin’s message; sophisticated technical expertise of the Kremlin’s information warfare that allowed access to a greater variety of foreign audiences, and utilization by the Kremlin of the relative openness of Western media for the Russian propaganda offensive.” Information warfare provides Russia an alternative way to compete with opposing nations, enabling them to achieve dominance in a much less costly manner than traditional military tactics. 

Russia relies on a few different tools in order to operate their information warfare. One of the largest and most widely-known is their exploitation of global social media. The advantages of social media exploitation include its cost-effectiveness, its ease of access, and how difficult it is to trace. Disinformation and propaganda are now becoming a larger part of the sphere of technology, which has led Russia to use a variety of tactics such as “computer network operations, electronic warfare, psychological operations, deception activities, and the weaponization of social media.”

Another key aspect of Russia’s social media propaganda approach is their use of troll campaigns and bots called the Kremlin Troll Army. This group aims to spread fear and discord, impact the way people act and behave, and generally diminish trust in the government and make it impossible to use the internet as a democratic space. Lt Col Jarred Prier says this, “hinges on four factors: a message the fits an existing, even if obscure, narrative; a group of true believers predisposed to the message (when presented with information within one’s belief structure, biad is confirmed and propaganda is accepted easily); a relatively small team of agents of cyber warriors; and a network of automated ‘bot’ accounts”. As a result of this tactic, social media users are unsure of whether the content they are seeing was created by genuine humans or if it was simply the work of trolls and bots -- this makes it incredibly easy for Russia to create and spread a narrative of their choosing. 

Russia has also been utilizing control over Western media outlets in order to further their information warfare goals. They have been able to take the free speech and free press that are so highly viewed in democratic societies and use them to their advantage. One example of this has been through the use of state-sponsored foreign language news channels, such as Russia Today (RT). This channel started out with trying to improve the global image of Russia, but over time, transitioned to focus on the negative aspects of the West, particularly the United States. Other state-sponsored media outlets have even gotten involved in direct attempts at political disruption in other nations’ governments. Finally, Russia has also attempted to take over Western newspapers as another tactic. Here, they typically purchase areas in said papers in order to manipulate the views of those reading in the West. In these publications, readers will come across articles that try to paint Russia in a positive light while using language that Westerners would expect. 

It’s clear that Russia has a long, well-established history of relying on information warfare, and they have quite the extensive playbook to pull from when trying to develop a particular narrative. This has become increasingly evident as the war between Russia and Ukraine has escalated. TODO: give some examples of recent disinformation then wrap up.
